Deprecate symbolized facts (#193)
voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts: README.md

[![RubyGem Downloads](https://img.shields.io/gem/dt/rspec-puppet-facts.svg)](https://rubygems.org/gems/rspec-puppet-facts)
[![Donated by Camptocamp](https://img.shields.io/badge/donated%20by-camptocamp-fb7047.svg)](#transfer-notice)

> * [Installation](#installation)

Author: Do you mean that I shouldn't add a ToC?

> * [Installation](#installation)

Reviewer: I'm hesitant. Keeping those 2 in sync isn't always a great success. https://www.rubydoc.info/gems/rspec-puppet-facts/4.0.0 also already generates a ToC so it'd also be redundant.

> * [Installation](#installation)

Author: I'm fine with removing it.

> * [Installation](#installation)

Author: I removed it from this branch, but have the commit still local, in case we want to revisit the idea.

* [Specifying the supported operating systems](#specifying-the-supported-operating-systems)
* [Specifying a default Facter version](#specifying-a-default-facter-version)
* [Usage](#usage)
    * [Testing a type or provider](#testing-a-type-or-provider)
    * [Testing a function](#Testing-a-function)
    * [Adding custom fact values](#Adding custom fact values)
    * [Override and add facts](#override-and-add-facts)
    * [Set global custom facts](#Set global custom-facts)
    * [Confine custom facts](#confine-custom-facts)
    * [Create dynamic facts](#create-dynamic-facts)

>     * [Merge into existing facts](#merge-into-existing-facts)

Author: fixed it

```ruby
RSpec.configure do |c|
  c.default_facter_version = '3.14.0'
end
```

## Symbolized vs stringified facts

For a long long time, the first level of keys in a factsets were symbols.
This was fine before there were structured facts, but structured facts ended up as nested hashes that always had strings.
This doesn't make sense and easy to get wrong.
The original data contains only strings so conversion actually costs performance.

The option to switch between symbolized vs stringified facts was introduced in [25634f4481f20f2fc7444e867928ca607234e33e](https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/commit/25634f4481f20f2fc7444e867928ca607234e33e) (Release [1.9.5](https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#2019-07-29---release-195)), but version 5.0.0 has resolved various implementation bugs.

This can be configured like this:

```ruby
RSpec.configure do |c|
  c.facterdb_string_keys = false
end
```

In the 5.x release series of rspec-puppet-facts the default `false` is deprecated.
With the 6.0.0 release we will flip it to `true` (https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/pull/189).

> People might have the following rspec-puppet test:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may have the following rspec-puppet test using deprecated symbolized facts:
```

```ruby
on_supported_os.each do |os, os_facts|
  case os_facts[:os]['name']
  when 'Archlinux'
    context 'on Archlinux' do
      it { is_expected.to contain_package('borg') }
    end
  when 'Ubuntu'
  end
end
```

> After the flip, every key in the factset will be a string:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the string facts, the same test looks like:
```

```ruby
on_supported_os.each do |os, os_facts|
  case os_facts['os']['name']
  when 'Archlinux'
    context 'on Archlinux' do
      it { is_expected.to contain_package('borg') }
    end
  when 'Ubuntu'
  end
end
```

Proper support for stringified facts was introduced in commit [f5fcdb547da74e789b7c8237138d5285b3edb41d](https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/commit/f5fcdb547da74e789b7c8237138d5285b3edb41d) (https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/pull/175).
It was released in [4.0.0](https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#400-2024-06-10) so you can already use and test it.
It has one bug in the CI output.
rspec-puppet-facts lets you know when it didn't find a facterset that matches your exact Facter version:

```
No facts were found in the FacterDB for Facter v4.7.0 on {"os.name"=>"Archlinux", "os.hardware"=>"x86_64"}, using v4.5.2 instead
```

With stringified facts, the found Facter version isn't printed:

```
No facts were found in the FacterDB for Facter v4.7.0 on {"os.name"=>"Archlinux", "os.hardware"=>"x86_64"}, using v instead
```

> This is fixed in [edb710b6f5d95d86631d05075d098a2ceea10e95](https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/commit/edb710b6f5d95d86631d05075d098a2ceea10e95) and released in 5.0.0.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we should document using v4. Earlier we said 5.0.0 resolved implementation bugs. Let's just tell them to upgrade to 5.0.0 and then make the conversion.

Author: sounds good to me, I removed it.

## Specifying a default Facter version

By default, `on_supported_os` will return the facts for the version of Facter
that it has loaded.
It will match the Facter version based on the loaded Puppet version to what the official packages provide.
The mapping is
stored in `ext/puppet_agent_components.json` (check the
[maintenance](#maintenance) section for details) and computated in the
`facter_version_for_puppet_version` method. This behaviour can be overridden by
setting the `default_facter_version` RSpec setting in your `spec/spec_helper.rb`

> file.

Reviewer: My direct feedback was lazy. I'd consistently use sentence case

Author: you mean one line per sentence? can update it.

Author: Updated the style, let me know what you think about it.

## Specifying a default Facter version

By default, `on_supported_os` will return the facts for the version of Facter

> that it has loaded. It will check for the loaded Puppet version and maps that to
> the Facter version that Perforce released in the matching AIO. The mapping is

Reviewer: Is this clearer?

```suggestion
that it has loaded.
It will match the Facter version based on the loaded Puppet version to what the official packages provide.
The mapping is
```

stored in `ext/puppet_agent_components.json` (check the
[maintenance](#maintenance) section for details) and computated in the
`facter_version_for_puppet_version` method. This behaviour can be overridden by
setting the `default_facter_version` RSpec setting in your `spec/spec_helper.rb`
file.

```ruby
RSpec.configure do |c|
  c.default_facter_version = '3.14.0'
end
```

## Symbolized vs stringified facts

For a long long time, the first level of keys in a factsets were symbols. This
was fine before there were structured facts, but structured facts ended up as
nested hashes that always had strings. This doesn't make sense and easy to get
wrong. The original data contains only strings so conversion actually costs
performance.

The option to switch between symbolized vs stringified facts was introduced in
25634f4481f20f2fc7444e867928ca607234e33e (Release

> [1.9.5](https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#2019-07-29---release-195)).

Reviewer: But there are serious bugs until the next release.
```suggestion
[1.9.5](https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#2019-07-29---release-195)), but version 5.0.0 has resolved various implementation bugs.
```

This can be configured like this:

```ruby
RSpec.configure do |c|
  c.facterdb_string_keys = false
end
```

In the 5.x release series of rspec-puppet-facts the default `false` is
deprecated. With the 6.0.0 release we will flip it to `true` (https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/pull/189).

People might have the following rspec-puppet test:

```ruby
on_supported_os.each do |os, os_facts|
  case os_facts[:os]['name']
  when 'Archlinux'
    context 'on Archlinux' do
      it { is_expected.to contain_package('borg') }
    end
  when 'Ubuntu'
  end
end
```

After the flip, every key in the factset will be a string:

```ruby
on_supported_os.each do |os, os_facts|
  case os_facts['os']['name']
  when 'Archlinux'
    context 'on Archlinux' do
      it { is_expected.to contain_package('borg') }
    end
  when 'Ubuntu'
  end
end
```

Proper support for stringified facts was introduced in commit
f5fcdb547da74e789b7c8237138d5285b3edb41d
(https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/pull/175). It was released in

> [4.0.0](https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#400-2024-06-10)

Reviewer: https://github.com/voxpupuli/rspec-puppet-facts/commit/edb710b6f5d95d86631d05075d098a2ceea10e95 is still unreleased.

Author: I updated the README.md
